Add documentation for agent, chatbot and MCP added to Otel-demo (#10574)
open-telemetry/opentelemetry.io: content/en/docs/demo/services/mcp.md

---
title: MCP Service
linkTitle: MCP

> aliases: [mcpservice]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

---
title: MCP Service
linkTitle: MCP
aliases: [mcpservice]
cSpell:ignore: fastmcp traceloop httpx jlowin
---

The MCP service exposes the OpenTelemetry Astronomy Shop demo's tools over the
[Model Context Protocol](https://modelcontextprotocol.io/). It runs a
[FastMCP](https://github.com/jlowin/fastmcp) server that lets the
[Agent service](../agent/) (or any other MCP-compatible client) discover and
invoke shop operations such as listing products, managing carts, and checking
out.

[MCP service source](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-demo/blob/main/src/mcp/)

## Overview

> - Runtime: Python 3.11

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Runtime: Python 3.14
```

Whenever https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-demo/pull/3558 gets merged

| `MCP_ENDPOINT`                | `mcp` in Compose           | Service hostname used by other demo services (e.g. `agent`).                                          |
| `APPLICATION_ENDPOINT`        | `frontend:8080` in Compose | Frontend/API endpoint used by the shop tools.                                                         |
| `OTEL_EXPORTER_OTLP_ENDPOINT` | `localhost:4317`           | OTLP endpoint used by Traceloop/OpenTelemetry. In Compose this points to the OpenTelemetry Collector. |
| `OTEL_EXPORTER_OTLP_INSECURE` | unset                      | Set to `true` in Compose for insecure local OTLP export.                                              |
| `OTEL_RESOURCE_ATTRIBUTES`    | inherited                  | Additional OpenTelemetry resource attributes (Compose adds `service.criticality=low`).                |
| `OTEL_SERVICE_NAME`           | `AstronomyShopAgentMCP`    | Service name used in telemetry.                                                                       |

### Docker Compose configuration

> In `docker-compose.yml`, the service is named `mcp` and is built from

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In `compose.agent.yaml`, the service is named `mcp` and is built from
```

`src/mcp/Dockerfile`. It depends on the `agent` service. The `agent` service
enables MCP usage via:

```text
MCP_ENABLED=True
MCP_ENDPOINT=mcp
MCP_PORT=8011
```

When `MCP_ENABLED=True` on the agent side, the agent loads its tools from this
MCP service instead of using its own built-in tools.

## Local development

> From the repository root, install dependencies. Because the service imports the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
From `src/mcp`, install dependencies. Because the service imports the
```

Reviewer 2: Maybe we need to better phrase here as we need files from the shared tools.
